hello mats fans i am back with grant
from three blue
one brown and grant has asked me to
teach him some fluids
which i am super excited about like this
is like my dream
so not only did i get to teach brady
some fluids now i get to teach grad some
fluids i've decided what we're gonna do
today
is um something called um potential flow
and the method of images okay so
potential flowing fluids it's like a
very idealized
setup so you have a it's an irritational
and incompressible and inviscid fluid we
don't need to worry about what those
words mean
it's just certain labels of it's quite
an ideal situation
so the um sort of setup is to think
about um
sort of flow fields that's the idea here
so we're thinking about the sort of
standard
fluid flows that can occur so we're
going to be in the the xy plane
so 2d and then i'd say we have some
fluid moving
at let's say an angle alpha okay
with the positive x-axis so sort of if
you were to try and draw that flow field
and infinite there's no boundaries
there's no boundaries just the whole
thing and it's all moving in the same
way it's all moving at the same angle
and the same speed yes with respect to
the x-axis
perfect exactly something like that so
sort of this is what we call a uniform
um a uniform flow and that there is
going to be alpha
angle okay so that's like the simplest
setup um then we have some some other
type of flow which we call a stagnation
point flow
and so this is where you have a point
where at this point there is zero flow
but there's kind of flow around it okay
so so this won't necessarily be
be a uniform flow but like there's
there's something happening but there's
this sort of central point where there
isn't any flow
okay as an example if we take this to be
the origin
um and then you sort of think well if i
were to have
sort of some flow coming in like this
and then like this but at the center
it kind of there isn't any flow well
then i guess yeah it's sort of something
where there's flow lines
yes doing this sort of thing like
vectors along that that
get more and more looking like that as
you get closer
yes so i think if something happened to
be precisely on the y-axis
then it just approaches the origin and
never quite reaches it yeah because it
goes so
slow how do you think the epsilon away
from it generally gets shifted into the
positive x direction yeah okay that's
the way to think about it
so we have this this stagnation point
flow and then the other one that we
might be interested in
would be a source or sink so we're going
to consider a source
we're going to call it a line source and
again this is going to be at the origin
where it's just sort of throwing
everything out equally in all directions
all right so just when you say line
source though there's just a single
point that is the source
yes and the sense in which we're talking
line is that it's lines going away from
it
exactly okay so it's just equally
shooting everything out in all
directions
and i'm doing what you want me to do
which is to draw what i think you're
describing
yes yes yes absolutely this is just
hopefully this one's a little bit
trickier the stagnation point flow but
these are like sort of the the canonical
fluid examples that we consider in the
setting and what we want to try and do
is construct a mathematical
equation or formulation for each of
these and then think about how we can
use that to then build more and more
complicated
particular fluid flows sounds good
that's the kind of idea
so so then what we're going to do now is
consider
the uniform flow from earlier
and a source okay so now what i want is
out here some flow coming in at some
constant speed
yeah sure then you've got a source here
which is shooting out in all directions
equally and i want to you to attempt to
draw what the streamlines or the
velocity field might look like
using your complete sort of physical
intuition my thought is that
uh they'll add together linearly um
so if in the original what do you call
it line source flow
if we would have had it had some vector
that goes out kind of like this
that we'll be adding it to whatever the
uniform vector is
right and so instead we'd have something
like that
so as we are farther away from this
it generally will look positive yeah but
as we get closer to it
it seems to be pointed more out yeah
we're out
that kind of thing and uh
similarly here instead of pointing
backwards we're going to be adding that
so something
i may be making it messy by putting it
all right
but something that's kind of of that
general form so like as we're closer to
the center
so even even here so it's kind of
shooting out but then sort of very
quickly coming back on itself
isn't it almost like i want to see like
a pitchfork
but maybe not maybe i'm just picturing
pitchforks wrong
i don't know but okay so it's a bit
tricky
okay yeah yeah nice yeah yeah okay long
flowing hair okay
so the way we um sort of try and turn
these lovely diagrams into maths is
using something called potentials which
is why it's called potential flow
so for the uniform flow um we have
uh our potential w is written as
constant u which is the
the uniform speed that we're moving at
e to the minus i alpha
okay and then z
and so this describes our
uniform flow with angle alpha where we
are moving at constant speed u
the alpha is appearing in the e so
that's giving us the cos and the sine
so like the components of the vector
and what we can say about w is we get
the velocity components
from our potential theory by
differentiating dw
by dz okay and like i'm saying and so
this is a complex value
this is indeed complex and this is equal
to little u
minus iv where u is your x velocity
component and v
is your y velocity component so this has
just come from the picture
and then given this formula if you then
calculate
dw by dz u
e to the minus i alpha so that's
u cos
of um alpha
oh i'm sorry okay so this is all yeah oh
because that's just a comma minus
i sine
alpha um
i think is correct and then if you then
say this is now relating to u minus iv
u is given by u cos alpha minus i and
then the v
as you sign alpha so they match up
so now if we look at the stagnation flow
again so here
what we have for our complex potential
now is w is
z squared over two okay
in this instance so now if we were to
try and
go back here and think about what u and
v
might be our velocity components
um do you have any idea or anything what
they might be here
uh okay uh i really want to just jump
into calculating it i guess
yeah you could do it that way it's got
to be something such that
the zeros of the y component all live
on the x-axis and the zeros of the
x-component all live on the y-axis yeah
c is a key yeah right
um well if you satisfy the axes
everything else should follow
really so along the like if it's a
sufficiently natural looking formula
that satisfies that
yeah pretty much um i guess that already
tells us
that let's see what's the convention so
we're calling u
the x component yes so the x component
has to be something that's zero when y
is zero
yeah right so is it's going to be y
times something
right and then similarly v is going to
look like
x times something yeah right and then
i'm saying
what is my x component in general it's
positive when x is positive negative
when x is negative
so uh that feels but i don't want it i
don't want to
just multiply by x though because it's
not zero
i think these may be the one way around
right okay
sorry yeah okay because the the x
component of all of this when x is equal
to zero yeah
yeah x and then the y component of this
um
is gonna be y times something uh
but in this context it looks positive
when y is negative negative when y is
positive
it's maybe by negative one um
and then i'm comfortable with the x just
looking like what it is and this would
even work with the zero at the origin as
well
yeah and like if there is if there isn't
a need to add anything more to these
that's
just like as good a guess as anything
else
yeah and it's perfect because now if we
do dw by dz
we of course just get z which is x plus
i y
and so since that is u minus iv u must
be
x which is what you're writing down and
v must be minus y okay
and then for the line source um it's a
bit trickier to see the line source
um and it's sort of crying out for polar
coordinates
rather than the next y but you can sort
of
hopefully take my word for it that what
you're going to get
is you get this two pi coming in from
the angular dependence
and then it's log that's it so this is a
cube
this is just a constant but we we label
it as q so it's an integration constant
we call it q
because you think of q as like a volume
flux or like a
strength of a source and this is
actually going to relate to the strength
of the source okay yeah
so we've said kind of yeah exactly
exactly you can literally do the
integral
for the source strength and it comes out
as q
with this function so we've got this one
for the
source we've got this one for the
stagnation point
and then we have the exponential um
for the uniform flow
so now that we've got the potentials
kind of
what you spotted when we go back to your
lovely diagram earlier with adding of
the vectors and it is actually
it's complicated but it's it is a lovely
diagram
so what kind of is going on here and you
completely figure this out is like you
kind of just
add your potentials to get the new
potential and the new description of
this velocity field
and to be clear is the re the reason
that's true is that
the equations governing this are linear
exactly yes divergence is zero
curl is zero and those you can add
together
yes okay yes and the the other the big
momentum now your stokes gives you an
equation but that equation turns into
bernoulli's theorem okay
which tells you something about the
flows but isn't used to solve for
the velocity the solving bit comes from
the irritational and the
incompressibility the divergence of the
curl both being zero nice and linear
things
put them together you get laplacis
equation again super linear
so like basically you're solving laplace
to find these different potentials
in these different situations and so we
get these um
these three functions and now what this
means is that when we want to know for
example the potential here
we literally just add the uniform flow
okay where now our angle will be zero
to the potential for the source and that
then gives the potential for this and
then you once you've got the potential
that tells you the velocity field okay
so your and and it does match your
intuition you have this uniform flow out
here
you have this envelope region and then
you have the flow coming in
and sort of inside this you get
this kind of behavior and then out of
here it's as though it doesn't exist
interesting okay that's what happens
when you add the two together
now the whole purpose of this is finally
going to get onto this idea of method of
images
so we've got like a basic idea of some
flows we've got something about these
potentials and we kind of just add them
all together
to get what's happening so now you can
say well
well these are all very very idealized
situations so what if we start adding in
boundaries
right and this is something that you
mentioned a few times you're like i want
boundary conditions i want to know
what's going on here so
let's suppose now we have a wall or a
boundary
and then here we have a source okay
and now we want to know what's the flow
field going on here
right okay because it's it's going to
come
somehow once it's at that wall it needs
to smooth itself out
right yeah exactly and i imagine it's
not that the
wall has its own complex equation
this is the complex equation for the
flow potential in a wall isn't it
no we can actually get the answer using
everything that we've got so far
okay okay as a starting point so if we
take this to be
the the axis and we say right so now
we've got
the wall is on our y-axis and this is
located at let's say x
equals d okay then we know
that the potential for that thing must
be
q over 2 pi instead of being log of z
it's going to be log of z minus d
sure okay yeah um so we just shifted a
little bit
but then of course that only works
without the wall right
right and the whole challenge is and the
whole challenge is how do we modify this
given we've got this wall we want to
know what's going on because as exactly
as you've drawn this is going to come
out and the point is it's going to have
to turn and sort of go up
and then these other bits are going to
kind of do that so there's
perhaps past here this bit doesn't know
right but in here there's going to be
some effect
so i mean like with the log this is
giving us a pole
in our complex equation there yeah so
it's kind of like we want to continue
having that pole
but we also want to somehow guarantee
that the
uh y com the x component is zero
along this whole thing yeah so a formula
that has x component zero but also has
this as a pole
which is not obvious to me no the clue
isn't the name of the method
of images okay so if we were to treat
our wall as a mirror
okay okay yeah yeah then which is like
where
you literally take the wall as a mirror
and reflect
to the other side so if we had a source
at minus d
and we had this source doing its thing
it would of course form the same
kind of pattern over here because they
like perfectly counteract each other
exactly so it would perfectly you know
that's what the wall is kind of doing
right the wall being there will have the
same effect as two swords it's like
colliding see yourself in a mirror and
you give your mirror yourself a high
five
it's like yes your hand stopped there
and you can't be sure that it's not
actually just another copy of you
yeah all the physics that just happened
is the same absolutely so
okay absolutely so if this is the clever
so then we just add this
to log of z plus d exactly so this is
then just q
log of z plus d that's lovely and so
that would then give us the potential
you take its complex derivative the wall
and that gives you velocities
exactly and it'll work out the whole
thing along the wall
the x component of zero oh that's
exactly that's just really good
so that was our first way smaller than i
would expect it to be
yeah yeah yeah yeah it's still quite a
mess don't you know let's not pretend
otherwise but yeah because you could of
course combine these into
using the rules of logs as well if you
really wanted into a single logarithm
okay
yeah okay great and then it's just yeah
multiplying them
which is grand but you would think
because this is a lot of complexity
yeah no absolutely i mean just the fact
that you can describe any of them with
this nice little potential equation it's
sort of neat
yeah so then that was a
sort of the standard example and then
you can also do the same with corners
um okay so now this is a wall
and this is a wall and i've got a source
here
that's some complex number c
so given your newfound knowledge and
love of the method of images
[Laughter]
i'm treating y-axis as a mirror yeah and
i'm also treating the x-axis as a mirror
exactly so there's a reflection of
itself down here
and then another one over here yeah
you need all four to be able to cancel
out in both directions all relevant
components
and then so what we'll have is going to
look like q over 2 pi
times
yeah okay i guess log of
z z
[Music]
minus v
plus e i oh i was just going to call it
c but yeah i'll just call the point c
if you just call the the point itself
well because i want to be able to
describe
i guess we could describe it with this
complex conjugate yeah
it should just about work with
conjugates and we don't necessarily have
to
write it all out no and then we're going
to have that one will be at
uh z minus c bar yeah
yeah and then uh what is this whole
thing is inside
log of z uh
okay so what is that negative
yeah this is negative negative conjugate
yeah exactly yeah so z
plus c bar and then lag for the
completeness sake
i like how you started with i'm not
gonna write this all out and then you're
like i need to write this all out yeah
so we've got minus e plus c bar minus c
bar
plus c plus c yeah that's silly there
okay
and so then again it's just the four all
that together and that describes the
flow field that you would get here
you can have this thing and then apart
from that it's going to kind of
do nice
that kind of behavior
sort of like that nice and that's
described by this
formula that's absolutely lovely okay
and then the very very final
so we can get really really go to town
with these is to consider
me we absolutely could continue with the
sort of polygons for sure and they're
just positioning various ones
but you've got something better i've got
something even better because i've got
the infinite channel the infinite
channel the infinite channel
so now we have walls on both sides
and then we're going to have a source
here in the middle and we want to be
able to describe mathematically
what's happening here so now our initial
thought is our method of images
as it's our new favorite thing so then
you would say well well i put one up
here
so if this has width if that's a this is
also
a then what we need to do is we then
need to go another
a yes this is going to be at zero
the real axis so there's gonna be
another a so this will now be a
two i a and then four i
a um so i've kind of given away that we
need to keep doing
more well because if you're in a room
with a mirror in front of you and a
mirror behind you
it's not like you see just one
reflection of yourself you've got to
keep
so you've got to keep going with these
every 2a yeah
all the way and you create an infinite
line great and so now we're going to
have an infinite series and now we've
got an infinite series
if we think about where these are you
could describe this position
as uh 2 n
i a as you sum over n over all integers
overall integers and so to put down the
full potential you'll get w
is q over 2 pi the limit
as n tends to infinity of the sum of
log z minus 2
n a i so this would be the true way of
writing this down and you've done it
probably
like where you're only gonna get um
convergence if you let there be
cancellation between the positive and
the negative
i imagine quite well that's the point we
don't know if this converges
at this point we have absolutely no clue
whether this is a sensible thing whether
this is complete nonsense like what on
earth's going on
other than physically using our method
this seems to be
the way to approach the problem is to
just keep reflecting reflecting and
everything should cancel out
should and give us the potential for
this source well the thing is as we take
the derivative of this
it looks like a harmonic series you know
what you're doing
which is exactly what we want to do
because we know that u minus iv
is cw by dz so we can take the
derivative
q over 2 pi um and then take the limit
and you get 1 over z plus 2z
times the sum of one over
squared plus n squared times four
a squared
where this is now going from naught to
infinity so so i sort of
skipped over a couple of steps so it was
differentiated
then rationalize the denominator make it
look nice and then i can say oh but this
is a 1 over n squared sum
i know this is going to converge i hope
and then i can take the limit
because i now know that it exists and
then you compare this to a known
sum um so the known sum here i say no
and it's potentially not that well known
but there's certainly a sum which is the
sum of one over
n squared plus be cotangent b squared
yes it is indeed
is equal to minus 1 over 2 b squared
plus pi uh it's a cost so hyperbolic
codon
cotangent b pi over
2b so we have this sum
and then this looks like this with the
appropriate choice of b
and so you rearrange all of this so we
know that dw by dz
which is u minus ib which is
q over 4a
cotangent hyperbolic pi z
over 2 a as your final velocity field
and now we can then integrate this back
up
and get what w should be in the first
place so it turns out the sum
was conversion after all um and get the
log
of a shine function
nice as our original which potential
field
yeah but i mean if we have this this is
the real
yes so this is the one that actually
allows you to then draw the picture so
if you were sort of trying to
go back and think what these things look
like you can
plot these for different values and you
take the real part of this
would give you the x component velocity
the imaginary part gives you v
and you sort of get what you would
hopefully expect which is
sort of these things are doing this so
this kind of looks like a hyperbolic
coat engine
and then these ones sort of just come
out and
kind of like that lovely oh that's so
clever
that's so clever sorry to have like that
infinite reflection yeah
i thought well when you said you wanted
to learn fluids i was like i've got to
think of something visual
like you know well
i felt like it did so so the method of
image is one of my favorite things in
fluid it's obviously quite advanced some
of the you know the maths that's
involved
but hopefully the the actual i mean the
technique for someone to be very like
satisfied with it you you'd want to be
comfortable um
interpreting the derivative of complex
like
when you think what's the derivative of
log z like having some
image in your head for what that means
yes and like if you have thought about
it a bit the idea of that
sort of being the same thing as curl
free and divergence free
like it jibes yeah if you haven't it's
like it'll it'll come there at some
point but
um if someone's willing to take for
granted
the idea that um these are accurate
descriptions yes of course so
i've sort of magically plucked these
potentials out of the air but then you
know once you once you sort of as you
say once you take that and say okay
these are the potentials for these
situations
then you can work with them and create
these neat but the core almost doesn't
even run
the core cleverness is that hey these
are linear so if we can just add them on
top of each other
absolutely our channel situation would
behave exactly the same as if there was
an infinite array of sources
providing the exact cancellation like
that
doesn't that key idea doesn't rely on
complex analysis but it's just
completely beautiful
yeah i love that good well i'm very glad
thank you so much
you're very very welcome yeah um and
thank you everybody for watching
um if you haven't already i'm sure you
have check out grant's amazing channel
three blue one brown and if you've
enjoyed this video please do
subscribe to my channel and i will see
you soon
awesome